Add "Your SPA Doesn't Need a Router" article (#57)
andrew--r/forweb.dev: src/site/en/blog/2020-07-09-no-to-routers/index.md

---
layout: article
tags: [articles, en]
date: 2020-07-09
title: Your SPA Doesn't Need a Router
author: stcherenkov
description: "So you are building a client-side web app for that next big project and wondering: "What router should I use?". Here is the thing: you don't need any at all."
og:
  image:
    url: social.jpg
    width: 1200
    height: 675
cover:
    src: the-journey-ahead.jpg
    alt: '"The journey ahead" by Anna Zarubey'
    srcset: the-journey-ahead@2x.jpg 2x
    width: 1200
    height: 675
---
<p class="paragraph--lead">
    So you are building a client-side web app for that next big project and wondering: "What router should I use?". Here is the thing: you don't need any, and you will understand why shortly.
</p>

# What is routing?

The first interface for a user to access any website is their browser address bar. Even if your website is visited via a link or from bookmarks, for a user it still goes through the address bar. Change of the address leads to a change of the page.

> Our application needs to determine from that URL which screen and in what state to show to the user.

Author: Неа, здесь именно экран как одно из состояний страницы.

По поводу привычности – вроде бы это частый термин в контексте дизайна: то есть дизайнер разрабатывает различные состояния для страницы в виде экранов. И, в сущности, я апеллирую именно к этому термину и значению.

<figure>
    <img
        src="one-step-away.jpg"
        alt='"One step away" by Anna Zarubey'
        srcset="one-step-away@2x.jpg 2x"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>"One step away" by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> So, in a nutshell, routing is matching the state to the input URL. Yes, that simple.

Author: По-другому обозначил зависимость

# Why is it difficult then?

When we scale our app, we split the state into many pieces. There are two reasons to do it:

1. it helps to avoid cognitive overload;
2. it allows to share the workload between several team members.

Usually, we don't need all the pieces at once, so we put them to different endpoints and storages. When a user opens the app, we reconstruct the required state from little pieces scattered all over the system. Moreover, some of the state pieces determine which subset of other pieces should be restored.

<figure>
    <img
        src="state-reconstruction.jpg"
        alt="Example state reconstruction scheme, drawing by Anna Zarubey"
        srcset="state-reconstruction@2x.jpg 2x"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>Example state reconstruction scheme, drawing by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> Sometimes state reconstruction is simple. For example, when user requests login page, we should just give them login page. Most of the times though this logic is a lot more complex, depending on current context, system state and business requirements.

Author: ОКСФОРДСКАЯ ЗАПЯТАЯ!

Поправил всё, кроме ~complex~ complicated, мой вариант вернее доносит смысл.

> The question is how much of this logic should we own and how much could we generalize and delegate to routing via a framework or a library?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The question is how much of this logic should we own, and how much could we generalize and delegate to routing via a framework or a library?
```

Author: Вот это очень хорошее замечание. Это ты или Grammarly?

Naturally, we would prefer to delegate as much code as possible. There are different approaches to that. One of them would be to fully separate routing and business logic.

> For instance, we could match path to some handler function and just pass query parameters to it, then it will decide on how to restore the state and what to show to the user.

Author: Разбил на два

It could look like this (🔀 is for routing, 🅱️️ is for business logic, ❇️ is for dependencies loading):

```
🔀 Receive request path with parameters in it
    🔀 Determine handler for this path and separate parameters
        ❇️ Load user session
            🅱️ Check if user is authenticated
        ❇️ Load user profile
            🅱️ Check if user is authorised to use this handler
        ❇️️ Load first item from path with parameter
            🅱️ Check if it exists
            🅱️ Check if user is authorised to use it
        ❇️️ Load second item from path with parameter
            🅱️ Check if it exists
            🅱️ Check if it is relevant to the first item
            🅱️️ Check if user is authorised to use it
        🅱️️ ... (Other Business Logic)
    🔀 Return the combined result
```

And with every "Check" block we could also return intermediary result or error.

> After a while, we will notice that most of these handlers mainly consist of the same instructions – session loading and authentication check, for instance. Maybe we could separate all these checks into another layer in order to stop repeating the same thing all over again?

Reviewer: Grammarly предлагает сократить:
```suggestion
After a while, we will notice that most of these handlers mainly consist of the same instructions – session loading and authentication check, for instance. Maybe we could separate all these checks into another layer to stop repeating the same thing all over again?
```

> Paths are also hierarchical by design, so we could use this fact to simplify our code too! Like, we can agree that all the authenticated paths start with `/user` – meaning we could match paths from left to right and apply different checks depending on where we are in the hierarchy right now.

Reviewer: `also` наводит на мысли о том, что ранее уже говорилось о какой-то иерархии, я что-то упустил? И `simplyfy ... too` тоже странновато читается

Author: Упростил всё предложение, смысл не теряется.

Welcome to the concept of Routing Middleware. It is still business logic, but it also can't be separated from paths structure. So it is still routing too.

> Both routing and business logic? Too complicated! Screw paths hierarchy then. Why don't we just define the list of all the checks and dependencies for each route?

Reviewer: Всё ещё не могу понять связь между иерархией путей и бизнес-логикой/роутингом. В чём здесь противоречие?

Author: Никакого нет противоречия.

Мы попробовали упростить код, опираясь на то, что у нас есть иерархия путей.

Получили миддлвары, которые обеспечивают нам зацепление роутинга и бизнес-логики.

А мы хотим разделить роутинг и бизнес-логику, чтобы делегировать роутинг библиотеке. Получилось, что библиотека почти ничего не будет делать, мы всё пишем руками, а это слишком сложно.

Reviewer: Теперь понял! Было бы понятнее, если бы говорилось `screw middleware then`.

> А мы хотим разделить роутинг и бизнес-логику, чтобы делегировать роутинг библиотеке. Получилось, что библиотека почти ничего не будет делать, мы всё пишем руками, а это слишком сложно.

Мне кажется, это хорошее уточнение, которое стоит прямо в статью добавить, тогда более ясная картина сложится в голове у читателя. Можно примерно так вписать:

```
Welcome to the concept of Routing Middleware. It is still business logic, but it also can't be separated from paths structure. So it is still routing too.

Both routing and business logic? Too complicated! We wanted a clear separation to delegate as much routing code as possible. Instead we got the opposite. Screw middleware then. Why don't we just define the list of all the checks and dependencies for each route?
```

Author: Долго думал, но в конце концов понял, что твой вариант оптимальный. Спасибо!

> Both routing and business logic? Too complicated! Screw paths hierarchy then. Why don't we just define the list of all the checks and dependencies for each route?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both routing and business logic? Too complicated! Screw paths hierarchy then. Why don't we define the list of all the checks and dependencies for each route?
```

> That would work, but we still need to provide context for those. With authentication and handler authorisation it's quite straightforward – we can identify user from the named cookie passed in request context. But what about data availability and access control? Do we need to define additional language to extract ids from path? Or do we need to always name those ids in some consistent way?

Reviewer: Фиксы от Grammarly + предлагаю заменить `ids` на `parameters` как более общий термин
```suggestion
That would work, but we still need to provide context for those. With authentication and handler authorization, it's quite straightforward – we can identify a user from the named cookie passed in the request context. But what about data availability and access control? Do we need to define an additional language to extract parameters from the path? Or do we need to always name those parameters in some consistent way?
```

Author: Так это не parameters, а ids. Я тут говорю про позиционные аргументы в составе пути, и туда никогда не отправляют какие-то параметры – там всегда идентификаторы.

Author: И запятую Grammarly неправильно поставила, там предлог надо заменить, ща сделаю.

Author: Чуть-чуть переписал конец.

> Also, we want to optimise things, so we need to define sequences or relations for dependencies loading and checks. And some of them could be done in parallel – that should be defined too. Do we need one more language? Or do we do it imperatively? Then how is it different from middlewares?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also want to optimize things, so we need to define sequences or relations for dependencies loading and checks. And some of them could be done in parallel – that should be defined too. Do we need one more language? Or do we do it imperatively? Then how is it different from middlewares?
```

These questions make routing such a difficult task.

> Should it really be so hard though? Maybe backend already solved all the problems, and frontend should just repeat after it's elder brother? It already does, but there are multiple important obstacles along the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should it be so hard, though? Maybe backend already solved all the problems, and frontend should repeat after it's elder brother? It already does, but there are multiple important obstacles along the way.
```

> Should it really be so hard though? Maybe backend already solved all the problems, and frontend should just repeat after it's elder brother? It already does, but there are multiple important obstacles along the way.

Author: Про фронтенд, и это вроде как понятно из контекста и форм глаголов. Бэкэнд уже решил – в прошедшем времени. Фронтенд должен повторить – в будущем времени. Он уже это делает – относится к будущему, потому что простое продолженное время нельзя применить к законченному прошедшему времени.

> # How is web frontend routing different from backend routing?

Author: Это сложный вопрос, другой эксперт говорит мне, что всё же имеет смысл давать на это указание, потому что мобильная разработка – это тоже фронтенд, и там тоже есть роутинг, и у него есть свои особые проблемы.

> # How is web frontend routing different from backend routing?

Reviewer: Согласен, что разница есть, но нужно ли это уточнять на протяжении всей статьи? Мне кажется, достаточно это упомянуть один раз в начале. Но вопрос неоднозначный, так что остаётся на твоё усмотрение.

### Mistake #1: defining routes in view layer

<figure>
    <img
        src="off-label.jpg"
        alt='"Off-label" by Anna Zarubey'
        srcset="off-label@2x.jpg"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>"Off-label" by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

As you already know, routing process is heavily dependent on business logic. The only two cases when routing and view should collide are mapping resolved state to page and rendering links.

So there is no actual reason use your view logic for routes definition. And when you do something without reason, you make it difficult to understand and maintain.

It still works quite good on small apps though, because they don't have any complex or asynchronous business logic, and the only thing they need is a list of route-page pairs.

### Mistake #2: routing as simple mapping from paths to pages

<figure>
    <img
        src="obvious.jpg"
        alt='"Obvious" by Anna Zarubey'
        srcset="obvious@2x.jpg 2x"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>"Obvious" by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> Router docs tell you can define routing in declarative style. Meaning the whole routing problem is just a key-value dictionary.

Reviewer: Я бы тут чуть переформулировал:

```suggestion
Some router’s selling point is a declarative style for defining routes. Meaning a whole routing problem is just a key-value dictionary.
```

> No, it's not. It could be, but only in simple hello-world-ish cases, which get complex as soon as your app becomes 1 month old.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, it's not. It could be, but only in simple hello-world-ish cases, which get complex as soon as your app becomes one month old.
```

> In general it is a fully-fledged process with dependency loading, data processing and decision making. It is also full of side-effects: from external dependencies and data loading to browser history management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, it is a fully-fledged process with dependency loading, data processing, and decision making. It is also full of side-effects: from external dependencies and data loading to browser history management.
```

### Mistake #3: immediate transitions

> Let's assume, you are on a simple website with no javascript at all. When you click the link, are you immediately transitioned to your destination? No, even in this simple case you have to wait until the next page is loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume you are on a simple website with no javascript at all. When you click the link, are you immediately transitioned to your destination? No, even in this simple case, you have to wait until the next page is loaded.
```

> Waiting for transitions is in the DNA of the web from day one. Users got used to waiting after clicking the link, they **expect the next page to be loaded.** This means, it's ok to wait, because it is going to show me my entire friend list, and that's a lot of data, and I'm on 2G internet in the middle of nowhere, so I totally understand.

Reviewer: Получилась тавтология с `users got used` :–( Может так?

```suggestion
Waiting for transitions is in the DNA of the web from day one. We got used to waiting after clicking the link, and we **expect the next page to be loaded.** This means it's ok to wait because I requested my entire friend list, and that's a lot of data, and I'm on 2G internet in the middle of nowhere, so I totally understand.
```

> Router should allow to transition out of page, handle waiting time, then transition to the next page. That's what browsers already do with websites, and the least we can do is not break it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A router should allow to transition out of the page, handle waiting time, then transition to the next page. That's what browsers already do with websites, and the least we can do is not break it.
```

> ### Mistake #4: no place for dependencies or common behaviour

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mistake #4: no place for dependencies or common behaviour
```

<figure>
    <img
        src="ever-ready.jpg"
        alt='"Ever-ready" by Anna Zarubey'
        srcset="ever-ready@2x.jpg 2x"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>"Ever-ready" by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> This is generally a combination of #2 and #3, but feels like something to be addressed explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is generally a combination of #2 and #3 but feels like something to be addressed explicitly.
```

> Routers tend to work with pages as if the app already has everything it needs to display every page. And that may be true for calculator, or some mini game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routers tend to work with pages as if the app already has everything it needs to display every page. And that may be true for a calculator, or some mini-game.
```

> In reality we have network-heavy applications, which require both data loading and a lot of javascript and styles to display it. And most of the users won't even visit that one heavy page. So the most logical solution is to separate its resources from the rest of the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In reality, we have network-heavy applications, which require both data loading and a lot of javascript and styles to display it. And most of the users won't even visit that one heavy page. So the most logical solution is to separate its resources from the rest of the app.
```

> Now if we are going to separate that page, we have to put all the preconditions and dependencies inside of the page itself, but is it really where they belong? Also: do you enjoy repeating "if no user is authorised, redirect to login" for every page?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we are going to separate that page, we have to put all the preconditions and dependencies inside of the page itself, but is it really where they belong? Also: do you enjoy repeating "if no user is authorised, redirect to login" for every page?
```

### Mistake #5: one and only one path for every page

<figure>
    <img
        src="next-room-is-outside.jpg"
        alt='"Next room is outside" by Anna Zarubey'
        srcset="next-room-is-outside@2x.jpg 2x"
        width="1200"
        height="675"
    />
    <figcaption>"Next room is outside" by <a href="https://t.me/anna_zarubey">Anna Zarubey</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> There is a stable <abbr title="User experience">UX</abbr> trend to split long forms into multiple steps called "form wizards". If you are aiming for the good UX, you would usually prefer to add those steps to browser history. This will allow user to navigate between form steps with browser buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a stable <abbr title="User experience">UX</abbr> trend to split long forms into multiple steps called "form wizards". If you aim for the good UX, you would usually prefer to add those steps to browser history. It will allow the user to navigate between form steps with browser buttons.
```

> Sounds like a natural feature, right? But you can't implement it with basic router functionality. You will need to push those steps to browser history manually. Router will still listen to history events, so you will need to find a workaround to ignore them. Or you could just specify service paths, that are accessible only if the wizard is in a relevant state. Meaning users will share links to various wizard steps, and you will also need to check if they are allowed to go there directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sounds like a natural feature, right? But you can't implement it with basic router functionality. You will need to push those steps to browser history manually. The router will still listen to history events, so you will need to find a workaround to ignore them. Or you could just specify service paths that are accessible only if the wizard is in a relevant state. Meaning users will share links to various wizard steps, and you will also need to check if they are allowed to go there directly.
```

> You would presume routers don't support this, because there are some browser limitations. Well, actually there is none: you can push the next history state without route change, but with another data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You would presume routers don't support this because there are some browser limitations. Well, actually, there is none: you can push the next history state without route change, but with another data.
```

> Routers also don't allow storing modal dialog state. It leads to hacks, like modals having their own paths or managing modals without router at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routers also don't allow storing modal dialogs state. It leads either to hacks like separate paths for dialogs or to managing dialogs without router at all.
```

And some routers even forbid mixing [pathnames](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/URL/pathname) and [hashes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/URL/hash), while fragments (defined by hashes) are the vital part of the web platform and are the perfect fit for the use case of virtual routing. Which literally is rendering of different fragments of the same page depending on current data state.

Yes, you guessed it correctly: virtual routing cannot be implemented because routers assume you only have plain mapping (see #2).

# What should we do then?

> All this sounds awful. What should we do to solve our routing problem in a simple, maintainable and scalable way without going crazy in the mean time? I'm glad you asked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All this sounds awful. What should we do to solve our routing problem in a simple, maintainable, and scalable way without going crazy in the meantime? I'm glad you asked.
```

> 1. You still need to deserialise state from path and serialise it back. There are many libraries that do it just fine, you can check, for instance: [path-to-regexp](https://github.com/pillarjs/path-to-regexp) (used by react-router and page.js), [path-parser](https://github.com/troch/path-parser) (used by router5) or [route-parser](https://github.com/rcs/route-parser). You also need to put that state into browser history (or sometimes not), and there is [history.js](https://github.com/browserstate/history.js/) lib for you. But you should probably just use [Browser History API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History_API) – it is in a good and consistent state across all major browsers right now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You still need to deserialise state from the path and serialise it back. Many libraries do it just fine. For instance, you can check [path-to-regexp](https://github.com/pillarjs/path-to-regexp) (used by react-router and page.js), [path-parser](https://github.com/troch/path-parser) (used by router5), or [route-parser](https://github.com/rcs/route-parser). You also need to put that state into browser history (or sometimes not), and there is [history.js](https://github.com/browserstate/history.js/) lib for you. But you should probably just use [Browser History API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History_API) – it is in a good and consistent state across all major browsers right now.
```

> 2. You need to add asynchronous dependencies check which consists of additional script loading and data requests. Usually, this is what your controller is already handling: redux-thunk, redux-saga, mobx, effector – whatever you prefer. If it handles your async logic, it could handle your async dependencies management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. You need to add asynchronous dependencies check, which consists of additional script loading and data requests. Usually, your controller already handles it: redux-thunk, redux-saga, mobx, effector – whatever you prefer. If it handles your async logic, it could handle your async dependencies management.
```

> 3. While transition is happening you need to know some meta info about it. It's always different, so you can just save whatever structure you prefer to your state manager. In most cases, the basics you would like to know are: is transition finished, what the current screen is and what is the next screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. While the transition is happening, you need to know some meta info about it. It's always different, so you can just save whatever structure you prefer to your state manager. In most cases, the basics you would like to know are the current screen, the next screen and the transition state.
```

> But you could also store: loading progress, all intermediary transitions (or redirects), additional context to help with transition, scroll position, cause of transition etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But you could also store loading progress, all intermediary transitions (or redirects), additional context to help with the transition, scroll position, cause of transition, etc.
```

> Your state manager can store all that data with ease and also keep it accessible for the business logic mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your state manager can store all that data with ease and keep it accessible for the business logic mentioned above.
```

4. You need to render the screen. In a simple case, you need to choose a component by name and render it. In a more complex case, you could choose a component and all the modal screens depending on your business logic. Anyway, that's the only reason for your view library to exist, so use it!

> That's it. You got the path, you got dependencies for it, you stored the meta info, you finally rendered the page. **No router was harmed along the way.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it. You got the path, got dependencies for it, stored the meta info, and finally rendered the page. **No router was harmed along the way.**
```

# Conclusion

> Routing is extremely hard to build in an abstract way, because of its high coupling with business logic and libraries used to define business logic.

Reviewer: Мне кажется, абстракция здесь не совсем корректный термин, может лучше так?

```suggestion
It is tough to build a generalised routing solution because of its high coupling with business logic and libraries used to define business logic.
```

> Of course, if you don't have business logic or put your business logic into view layer, you will be just fine with current solutions. But if you are building for the long term, putting your logic into view is neither maintainable, nor scalable. Yes, separating model and view still is a thing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, if you don't have business logic or put your business logic into the view layer, you will be fine with current solutions. But if you are building for the long term, putting your logic into view is neither maintainable nor scalable. Yes, separating the model and view still is a thing.
```

> There are some experimental projects though that try to treat routing as a process and mix it with state management. That could be a good angle to view this problem from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some experimental projects try to treat routing as a process and mix it with state management. That could be a good angle to view this problem.
```

> For example, [universal-router](https://www.kriasoft.com/universal-router/) resolves routes to actions which are fully capable of downloading requirements and deriving current view state. It also allows to pass any context to the action, meaning you can add your state manager there. Still, its concept of middlewares is too simple, it lacks community support and development predictability with at least some basic roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, [universal-router](https://www.kriasoft.com/universal-router/) resolves routes to actions that are fully capable of downloading requirements and deriving current view state. It also allows you to pass any context to the action, meaning you can add your state manager there. Still, its concept of middlewares is too simple, and it lacks community support and development predictability with at least some basic roadmap.
```

> For example, [universal-router](https://www.kriasoft.com/universal-router/) resolves routes to actions which are fully capable of downloading requirements and deriving current view state. It also allows to pass any context to the action, meaning you can add your state manager there. Still, its concept of middlewares is too simple, it lacks community support and development predictability with at least some basic roadmap.

Reviewer: Фраза про стейт-менеджер не совсем понятна, может как-то точнее сформулировать или добавить пример?

> But why use any libraries, if routing can be so dead-simple when you just do it in business logic?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But why use any libraries, if routing can be so dead-simple when you do it in business logic?
```
